if you're old enough to remember the old
dragnet show on radio and television
you'll probably recall Jack Webb's
ritual reminder that only the names have
been changed to protect the innocent in
this program some of the more crucial
names have not been changed
they've been deleted and the deletions
were made not by the producers of the
program but by the Justice Department of
the United States government and it's
not the innocent who are being protected
it's the guilty to director FBI from
Special Agent in Charge Phoenix FBI memo
released by the Justice Department name
of special agent deleted by Justice
Department subject counterintelligence
program internal security disruption of
the new left date May 31st 1968 on the
basis of developments to date it is
apparent that new left organizations and
activities in the Phoenix metropolitan
area have received their inspiration and
leadership almost exclusively from the
members of the faculty in the Department
of Philosophy at Arizona State
University
ASU chiefly assistant professor Morris J
Starsky the most logical targets for
potential counterintelligence action
locally are therefore pretty obvious
you've got these documents from the FBI
by suit under the Freedom of Information
Act could you tell me why you suspect it
in the first place that there was
material on you in the FBI files
well I the suspicion wasn't based on too
much because I really Mauro's Starsky
anti-war activist member of Socialist
Workers Party Wilma assistant professor
of philosophy at Arizona State
University was a period of time in in
Phoenix when I noticed that a car was
parked in front of our house
great lengths of time the same car the
same man sitting there so I suspect that
that being some kind of surveillance
there was always the ubiquitous
long-range telephoto cameras in
operation at every demonstration and
every opportunity there could be the
amount of press coverage that the
anti-war movement got in Arizona and
especially that I got as one of the
leaders of the anti-war movement in
Arizona since 1965 I created a kind of
atmosphere that led me to believe
they've got to be keeping records I
didn't have any idea at all zero idea at
all that they were quitting Hotel Pro
document COINTELPRO the FBI's acronym
for its counterintelligence program
brainchild of j edgar hoover targeted
mainly against blacks anti-war activists
and what was known in the 60s as the new
left it was only last November that the
Justice Department officially
acknowledged that there had been such a
program but evidence pointing to the
existence of COINTELPRO first began
servicing about four years ago in the
early hours of the morning of March 8th
1971 almost 1,000 documents was stolen
from the FBI office in media
Pennsylvania two weeks later
leading US newspapers and key
congressmen began receiving copies of
the FBI papers mailed by an underground
group calling itself the citizens
Commission to investigate the FBI
Attorney General John Mitchell pleaded
with the press not to publish the
documents the nation's top law
enforcement official claiming that
publication could endanger the lives of
FBI agents and constitute a threat to
national security
ignoring his pleas the Washington Post
began publishing the papers deleting
most names and locations in a sense
Mitchell's concern about national
security was justified because the
feeling generated by the FBI documents
among many segments of the nation was a
deep-seated insecurity a memo dated
November 4th 1970 showed J Edgar Hoover
ordering investigations of all groups
organized to project the demands of
black students a newsletter from the
bureau's Philadelphia office instructed
agents to increase interviews with
dissenters this the letter said will
enhance the paranoia endemic in these
circles and will further serve to get
the point across that there is an FBI
agent behind every mailbox another
document referred to the sending of
anonymous radical material to college
educators who quote have shown
reluctance to take decisive action
against the new left in the space of
less than two months the citizens
Commission to investigate the FBI sent
almost 800 documents to various papers
around the country with its final
consignment of papers the Commission
included an analysis of all the
documents taken from the bureau's media
office the study showed that 40% of the
material dealt with political
surveillance only 1% with organized
crime of that 40% devoted to political
espionage the report said to documents
concerned right-wing groups while more
than 200 dealt with left or liberal
groups we now know of course that at
that time it was not only the FBI that
was interested in watching and
disrupting liberal and left-wing
politics
we know that in 1970 then president
nixon approved a COINTELPRO type
operation authored by White House aide
Thomas Charles Houston the Houston plan
calling for the formation of an
intelligence evaluation committee
outside the Justice Department to
collect information on anti-war and
radical groups the data to be collected
by means such as illegal wiretaps and
burglaries indications are the plan
never get off the ground
J Edgar Hoover refusing to participate
on the grounds that existing coverage
was adequate we didn't find out how
adequate Hoover's vendetta against the
left was until December of 1973 when
more secret FBI documents came to light
this time they were released by the
Justice Department but only under the
compulsion of a quarter
sought by NBC reporter Carl stern under
the Freedom of Information Act these new
documents show that Hoover formally
began his campaign against the left in
May of 1968 in an internal memorandum
written that month
Hoover orders the bureau to expose
disrupt and otherwise neutralized the
new left the memo goes on to instruct
all bureau offices to take advantage
quote of all opportunities for
counterintelligence and also inspire
action where circumstances may warrant
that directive appears to have remained
FBI policy for the next three years
until April 28 1971 when an order came
down to kill the program immediately one
doesn't have to look very far afield to
figure out why only one month earlier
the Washington Post had begun publishing
the documents stolen from the FBI's
office in media Pennsylvania in 1972 J
Edgar Hoover died and that same year the
Justice Department initiated an in-house
probe of the FBI in an effort to purge
the Bureau of the Audion order left by
Hoover's 48 year reign first results
released November 18th 1974 indicated
that COINTELPRO had begun not in 1968 as
carl stearns memo suggested but a full
twelve years earlier in 1956 listener to
the KPFK evening news got the story from
Pacifica's paz cohan according to the
release there were 2000 370 approved
operations under the seven separate
COINTELPRO programs from 1956 to 1971
with over 500 instances of known results
five of the seven programs are aimed at
domestic groups two at foreign and
foreign connected groups the program's
goals extended from exposure to
neutralization the activities revealed
range from floating stories from public
source material to friendly media with
the goal of exposing the aims and
activities of the various groups to
attempted discrediting of candidates for
political office to attempts to quote
use religious and civil leaders and
organizations to exert pressure on state
and local governments employers and
landlords to the detriment of
various groups the programs began in
1956 were aimed at alleged subversive or
disruptive groups organizations and
individuals the only target from 1956 to
71 was the Communist Party USA followed
by the Socialist Workers Party and later
so-called white hate groups so-called
black extremists and the so-called new
Left no information was released on the
foreign aimed COINTELPRO activities for
national security reasons in releasing
the data attorney-general Saxby noted
that in a small number of instances some
of these programs involved will we
consider today to be improper activities
project COINTELPRO was officially ended
in 1971 and Saxby said steps have been
taken to prevent a recurrence of the
improper activities the Justice
Department document notes that some
activities also form part of the FBI's
ongoing responsibilities and are listed
as COINTELPRO only because they were
reported as such before detailing any of
the activities the Justice Department
release calls some unspecified actions
taken under COINTELPRO name abhorrent in
a free society adding that these
activities were neither the purpose nor
the major characteristic of COINTELPRO
among the COINTELPRO activities sending
anonymous or fictitious materials to
members of groups quote to create
dissension and cause disruption this
reportedly accounted for 40% of
COINTELPRO activities another 20% of
COINTELPRO work reportedly consisted of
disseminating public record information
to media sources to expose various
groups this was done mostly with regard
to the Communist Party USA following the
spreading of public information the
program also leaked investigative and
informant material particularly about
black and racist white groups informants
reportedly accounted for less than 2% of
COINTELPRO activities but informants are
classified as other than ASEAN's
provocateurs notifications of
individuals so-called illegal immoral
radical and communist party activities
were sent to employers perspective
employers credit bureaus and creditors
quotes to affect adversely their credit
standing or employment status this
tactic was used mostly against blacks
and the newly
attempts to persuade religious and civic
leaders to seek action against groups
was targeted predominantly against
so-called black extremists and anonymous
communications were sent to parents and
family members quote advising them of
immoral or radical activities on the
part of various individuals of the
thirty times this tactic was admittedly
employed sixteen instances were directed
at the new left of the twelve reported
and admittedly troubling instances of
activities related to political or
judicial processes most consisted of
leaking information to discredit unnamed
political candidates including one my
role contender Attorney General Sachs
refused to identify any groups or
individuals by name this is passe :
Pacifica Radio in Washington but since
that time the Justice Department has
identified one COINTELPRO target by name
Morris J Starsky we have already seen
that in 1968 the FBI was concerned about
starsky's organizing activities in
Phoenix in this next FBI memo dated July
1st 1968 we see the first of the
bureau's attempts to get Starsky fired
to director FBI from Special Agent in
Charge Phoenix subject
counterintelligence program internal
security disruption of the new left the
status of captioned program in the
Phoenix division as of July 1st 1968 may
be summarized as follows
one potential counterintelligence action
it was mentioned in Phoenix letter of
May 31st 1968 that Morris J Starsky as a
public employee is understood to be of
interest and concern - there are now
indications that as a result of this
interest which is by no means a matter
of public record and is unlikely to
become such the Board of Regents which
exercises administrative control of the
state universities may soon find cause
to separate professor Starsky from the
public payroll it is considered that he
may have falsified attendance records or
something of that nature
starsky's dismissal from the ASU faculty
could be expected to disrupt new left
organizations at hours
the State University and in the Phoenix
area generally it didn't work
Starsky remained on the ASU faculty and
continued his organizing work keeping
the left in the Phoenix area very much
alive but in January 1970 he unwittingly
gave his enemies just the ammunition
they needed to get him fired
with the full knowledge of the chairman
of his department he canceled a class to
attend a protest rally some right-wing
legislature probably who knows probably
inspired by the FBI who was aware of
these ways of getting people raised the
question where was he in class did he
have a class that day well then so think
the cry went up in the legislature and
again we don't know who inspired that
cry I wouldn't put it past the FBI to of
inspired I mean the some of these
legislators at that time were were so
real ultra-right us so that it could
have been independent but you never know
especially nowadays they put the
pressure in the regency Regents began
making sounds of like summary dismissal
the university attempted to block the
summary dismissal move by formally
reprimanding me for cutting a class by
written letter of reprimand from the
Dean first time I've ever happened in
the history of the university a written
letter of reprimand for or missing in
class and and supporters of mine decided
to counter the Regents thing by having a
nationwide telegram campaign directed
against the region's to stop the summary
thing and to move in the direction of
due process because the Regents had
agreed to follow the AAUP procedures for
tenured faculty members and so that this
was a reasonable demand you agreed to
these procedures follow them they were
forced to follow those procedures an ad
hoc committee was established to
investigate me so like a grand jury has
a secret committee played by the
president the resourceful FBI agent in
Phoenix saw the faculty committee as a
golden
opportunity for some disruptive activity
so on April 7th 1970 he wired the
following suggestion to Washington to
director FBI from special agent in
charge Phoenix subject COINTELPRO knew
left enclosed here with for the
consideration of the bureau are six
copies of an anonymous letter being
suggested for mailing to five faculty
members at Arizona State University
ASU hearing charges against Professor
Morris Jay Starsky a in the Phoenix
division Starsky is the subject of a
hearing which resumed on April 6 1970
before the faculty Committee on academic
freedom and tenure at ASU this committee
is weighing several charges made against
Starsky and recurring news reports have
stressed that the Arizona State
Legislature and the Arizona Board of
Regents both are anxious that Starsky
not be retained on the faculty at ASU
there has been some faculty and student
support developed for Starsky on the ASU
campus he is the faculty advisor for the
young socialists Alliance and the
student mobilization committee to end
the war in Vietnam SMC and local sources
believe that he is the catalyst of
meaningful new left protests on the ASU
campus and in the greater Phoenix area
Bureau approval is requested to mail a
copy of the enclosed anonymous letter to
each member of the faculty committee
which is hearing the charges against
Starsky this committee is sitting in the
law school on the ASU campus and is
composed of the following faculty
members one dr. ross our rice chairman -
John a Cochran 3 Richard WF 'land
4 john p decker 5 wallace adams chairman
of the faculty assembly on April 24th
Washington gave its assent and on May
12th 1970 special agent in charge
Phoenix reported that the letters had
been mailed dear sir it seems
appropriate that you should be informed
of one of the most recent activities of
Morris J
Starsky Starsky learned of a suicide
attempt by one of his close campus
co-workers David Murphy feeling that
Murphy could no longer be trusted as a
member of the campus socialist group
stars be demanded that Murphy return all
literature and other materials belonging
to the socialist group Murphy refused to
give Starsky a quantity of socialist
literature in his possession until
Starsky would pay him a sum slightly in
excess of $50 which was owed for
telephone calls charged by Starsky to
Murphy's telephone Mara Starsky was
indignant at Murphy's independent
attitude and at 2:00 a.m. on April 5th
1970 he accompanied by his wife Pamela
and two young male associates invaded
Murphy's apartment and under threat
demanded return of the socialist
literature when Murphy refused unless
Starsky paid the phone bill Starsky told
him that his two associates would beat
him unmercifully
Murphy convalescing from a recent
hospital stay was under great fear of
bodily harm or death and surrendered the
literature I find this episode
interesting
where did Starsky learn of the
effectiveness of smashing into a
person's home at 2:00 a.m.
also of utilizing for persons to
threaten the health or life of someone
is this an example of academic socialism
should the ASU student body enjoy the
guidance of such an instructor it seems
to me that this type of activity is
something that Himmler or Baria could
accept with pride
if Starsky did not enjoy the prestige
and sanctuary of his position he would
be properly punished for such a
totalitarian venture
unfortunately Murphy is too terrified to
testify against Starsky this is another
example of starsky's brand of academic
socialism a concerned ASU alumnus
substance behind this anonymous letter
is no none whatsoever
it's pretty upsetting that the the that
the FBI would use a situation which we
were all very deeply concerned about
about David Murphy
he was just suffering a great feeling
first of all emotional crisis and a lot
of problems and he was confused about a
lot of things Mellon threatened them no
one was you know harsh with him in any
way we were all very concerned that he
that he you know get back together again
he was going through hell literally I
mean he was really hurt so then he of
course we found out that he's filed a
complaint the next day we found that
both of these file that I would draw at
the next day but nobody nobody they
think this is what the FBI had moved in
on this situation move Danner exploited
a a troubled human being then they tried
to ruin me with this anonymous letter to
the committee and then thirdly they
simply totally insane --fill disregarded
this committee's role this committees
responsibility here's a body charged by
the Regents
under I'm sure cross a legal you know
framework you know to act as a kind of
trial board or jury or whatever and
here's this attempt to support it by the
FBI may have been glad that my lawyers
if that happened in a court to a jury it
would be criminal problems if they'd be
criminally what I had prosecutable for
that it's a criminal offense to tamper
that way and and that's what they did
and total disregard for the serious
responsibilities that these people have
so what you got is a bunch of people in
this government agency may actually no
regard for any kind of values whatsoever
not zero I mean never drive for any kind
of human values whatsoever just out do
what they can to keep people from
holding expressing or fighting for
certain kinds of ideas that they don't
approve of that they consider to be
subversive absolutely the low
no letter did not work that's that the
beauty of this that's what's in praise
of the of the committee they just didn't
buy that at all
and did their job properly we don't know
whether they sent copy to the region see
that we don't know many of these
interactive memo we don't know what the
region's connection was the FBI yet we
may find out later on but at the level
of the committee the committee stuck to
the evidence doctor the testimony but in
spite of the committee's findings the
Regents and the FBI did eventually have
their way the Regents ordered the
president of Arizona State University
not to renew starsky's contract strange
though trouble's seem to follow Starsky
wherever he went after I got a one-year
a visiting lecturer ship at San Diego
State to the understanding there was it
was a one-year deal but if money became
available I would be retained because
that department thought well of my work
in November of that year of vicious
red-baiting editorial hit in the san
diego union alerting the public to the
revolutionary Red Menace and it's missed
and suggesting the Arizona treatment the
University again we're not showing the
FBI must have been involved in there we
don't have that any evidence the
University freaking chopped the
philosophy departments money off for the
following year so that following year I
accepted a position this was at fault 71
they solicited me calculate the biggest
hills they were looking for a chair
wrote around the country and all kinds
of people recommended me that certainly
established a certain level of
qualification so they called me
I went came up to LA was interviewed by
month later I got an offer accepted it
moved to LA got a key to the
department's are organizing things and
nine days before classes began they
notified me they were canceling the
contract because I had
exhibited less than candor or something
didn't tell him about big fire years of
the state unity well technically I
wasn't really fired legally technically
honestly I wasn't really fight I was not
renewed they the President refused to
fire me in the region's waited until the
expiration of the contract date so I
wasn't really quite Starsky fought the
Dominguez Hills firing in the court and
won his case he is also continuing his
fight to win reinstatement at Arizona
State so far he has won the first round
that the Arizona Regents have taken the
case to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals
in the meantime Starsky a PhD in
philosophy works as a freelance legal
researcher but this is not a man who is
easily count on the contrary he is a
bullion enthusiastic filled with the
energy of a man who believes that the
fight is worth it and victory will be
his on the other hand he harbors no
illusion that America in 1975 is a
promised land for Morris Starsky or
anyone else on the left and he suspects
that recent terrorist attacks on
socialist groups in Los Angeles have
taken their cue from the FBI and the CIA
I do want to make the connection as
strong as I possibly can between the
kinds of activities that we're now
finding out that the government's been
engaged in that a that the CIA the FBI
have been engaged in and the overt
government rationales like Helms
rationale for the CIA spying on
Americans and opening mail we want to
see if there if the Americans were
involved in American dissidents were
involved in foreign subversion
mechanisms
see that kind of rationale and the cut
that kind of activities I don't think a
connection can be made strong enough
between that and see s attacks on the
Rosenbergs the road committee to open
the Rosenberg and the the bookstore
bombing of the October league the
appropriate bookstore which was bombed
in the swp east branch headquarters
which was found that climate of opinion
that's set by government policy
government rationalizations and
government agency action does that sets
sets that up even if the government even
if it turns out that the government
she wasn't directly involved but they
didn't plan it out and provide the the
the bonds and the CS gas and that that's
why that connection has to be made very
strongly between stopping the FBI and
the CIA from doing this if we want to
stop the mad bombers whether they be
right-wing organizations cops squads red
squats or just lone nuts hoopin who've
been who've heard the signal it's open
season on dissidents because the CIA and
the FBI and the government says so and
go out and make a bomb and blow up a
building and kill about your people
these contacts aren't just attacks on
socialists
there are tax on shoes they're
implicitly their attacks on Jews that's
what when they took credit when this
Nazi Liberation Front took credit for
the for the bombing they said what they
meant by when they said they were going
to exterminate socialists they meant
they said then that Jews and blacks
using their degrading term and and
Congress so it really is important that
that everybody on the left and
especially people who would be listening
to to KPFK and web KPFK as a voice of
diverse views and the spectrum of of
people fighting for an alternative
society or or social movements of a
progressive nature that that that those
people support the democratic rights of
October league to exist and to live and
district and its ideas the swp to exist
and to circulate its ideas in that
they're defending themselves long ago by
people on the Left unless you're willing
to defend everybody's rights you're not
going to be able to defend your own
you've been listening to COINTELPRO one
man's story the program was produced for
Pacifica Radio by Dave box'll with
assistance from Tim McGovern Mike O'Dell
Barbara spark Morris Jay Starsky and the
Freedom of Information Act
you